TABLE TENNIS

INTRODUCTION
Table tennis, or ping-pong, is an enjoyable sport but it can be highly competitive. Each
player tries to outscore his opponent through the use of skill, strength, speed, stamina
and strategy. The game is somewhat similar to tennis, where players hit the ball back and
forth over a net.
HISTORY
The origin of table tennis has never been exactly pinpointed, even though it’s a relatively
young sport. The sport is younger than lawn tennis and not much older than basketball.

Physical Education Learning Packets   #30 Table Tennis                
The Advantage Press, Inc.
The earliest known form of the sport, called indoor tennis, was played in the early 1880s
by British army officers in India and South Africa. They played the game by using lids
from cigar boxes as paddles and rounded corks from wine bottles as balls. They set up a
row of books across the middle of a table to establish the net.

James Gibb, an Englishman who visited the United States in 1900, brought some hollow
celluloid balls home and began playing indoor tennis with friends using the new balls.
Gibb apparently came up with the name “ping pong,” representing the sounds of the ball
hitting the paddle and then the table.
Central European dominance continued for a time after World War II, but Asian players
took over the sport beginning in 1953. One factor in the sudden emergence of Asian stars
was the introduction of the foam rubber paddle by Japan’s Horoi Satoh in 1952. The new
coating made the game faster and also allowed players to put even more spin in the ball.

The first national table tennis championship was staged in 1931 by the American Ping
Pong Association (APPA). Only the men’s singles was contested. The APPA was con-
trolled by Parker Brothers, which held the trademark on the word “ping pong.”

In the meantime, several other table tennis associations sprang
up around the country. In October of 1933, the U. S. Table
Tennis Association (USTTA), was organized.

The USTTA tournament was open to all comers. In 1936,
though, there was a special closed division for U. S. citizens
only. This was used to select U. S. representatives at the world
championships that year. This tournament is considered the
first U. S. national championship. There wasn’t another until

Physical Education Learning Packets            

Table tennis became an Olympic sport in 1988, with singles and doubles competition for
both men and women.

HOW THE GAME IS PLAYED
The game is won when one person scores 21 or more points and is two points ahead of
his or her opponent. In other words, you can win with a score of 21-19 but not 21-20. If
there is less than a two point difference, the game continues until one player is ahead by
two points.

Scoring points

The server must successfully serve the ball
to the other side of the table or lose a point to
the opponent. Once the ball is in play, either
player can score a point, if the other is un-
able to return the ball successfully to the other
side of the table.

Serving the ball

The server must throw the ball up at least 6 inches without spin before hitting the ball.
Flicking the ball to the paddle with the thumb or holding the ball and hitting it are illegal
services. The served ball must hit the table on the server’s side before bouncing over the
net. It must then hit the table on the other side. If it hits the net or misses the table on the
other side, it is a lost point.

If the ball hits the net and lands on the other side of the table, it is a let serve. The ball can
be served again.

Doubles game

In a doubles game, the ball must be served across the table to the opposite court. If it
does not hit the table on the opposite court, the opponent gets the point.

Serve five times

In common play, each player serves the ball--resulting in a score--five times. Then the

Physical Education Learning Packets            
The Advantage Press, Inc.
\other player serves. There are various methods to
determine who serves first.

Returning the ball

A player tries to return the served ball to the
opponent’s side. He or she must not let the ball hit his
side of the table before going over the net. It must
strike the table on the other side of the net. If it does
not, the opponent scores a point.

The players hit the ball back and forth until one misses a shot, giving the other player the
point.

There are a number of strategies used to win a game of table tennis. Some of these
include hitting to the weak side, slamming the ball and putting spin on the ball.

EQUIPMENT
The equipment required to play table tennis are a ping-pong table, a net, paddles and
ping-pong balls. Following is a summary of official table tennis rules on the equipment
used.
